Hello,
my name's William Stewart and I work
for Apple on the Core Audio team.
Welcome to session 209,
Core Audio Update.
[Transcript missing]
Thanks, Bill.
So the Media Hardware Control,
I'll start out just by introducing
what it is and who it's for,
talk a bit about some of the
devices that it supports.
They're kind of intense and
complicated in some ways.
And then I'll go through some basic
tasks in the API for receiving
input from these devices and
sending feedback back to them.
So here's a screenshot,
actually several windows from
Emagic's Logic application.
And this is fairly typical of
today's digital audio workstation.
In the upper right,
we've got the transport
control with lots of buttons,
your current locators,
locators where you're
going to punch in and out.
Over here we have the mixer window.
And this is kind of a
pretty direct analog to an
old-fashioned mixing console.
We have channel strips, volume, panning,
mute, solo, effect inserts, and so on.
And on the right we have automation
showing on top of some audio events.
I think I'm automating the balance
between the two channels in this example.
Now the mixer and the transport both
have real-world physical analogs.
If you go back,
we've got tape machines with
buttons on them and the mixer.
It's only been with the advent of
computer-based systems that we've got
this intense capability for automation.
So, in any case,
those applications can be a
bit unwieldy to deal with with
just a mouse and keyboard,
so now we're starting to
see devices like this.
This is the Mackie control.
Actually, it's the eMagic control.
And as you can see,
it has the same channel strips,
there are mutant solo buttons,
you can select tracks,
transport controls in the lower right,
a jog wheel, and so on.
So, we've got this movement back towards
these richer control interfaces
for these complex applications.
Now since these control surfaces right
now all have these custom protocols,
and we're seeing an increasing
number of applications,
not just digital audio
workstations like Performer is my
example in the upper left there,
but also Final Cut Pro is getting some
increasingly advanced audio capabilities.
So the purpose of MHC is to sit in the
middle and abstract the differences
between these various devices and make it
so all these different applications can
communicate through a single interface.
So looking in more detail
about how these devices work,
so this is the Mac-E control again.
A lot of them use MIDI as a transport.
Some others use like Ethernet and so on.
And in those situations,
the hardware manufacturer can
create a custom driver to deal
with that transport layer.
For devices that are MIDI-based,
with MHC,
we should be able to create just
profiles that are data-driven for the
most part to support these devices.
And in either case, whether it's a driver
or a custom protocol,
or a custom profile rather,
the purpose of that profile or the
driver will be to translate what's
going on at the transport layer
into just a series of profiles.
For devices that are MIDI-based,
with MHC,
we should be able to create just
profiles that are data-driven for the
most part to support these devices.
And just a little bit about MIDI here.
This goes both into the
implementation of MHC,
but also how things are layered.
Some applications will still want
to deal with Core MIDI directly
if you're recording musical
performances from a keyboard.
But if you wanted to just deal with
control surfaces and you're not a music
application that's working with MIDI,
you can deal directly with
the MHC portion of the
Core MIDI framework and just speak
in terms of functional methods.
And just a little bit about MIDI here.
This goes both into the
implementation of MHC,
but also how things are layered.
Some applications will still want
to deal with Core MIDI directly
if you're recording musical
performances from a keyboard.
But if you wanted to just deal with
control surfaces and you're not a music
application that's working with MIDI,
you can deal directly with
the MHC portion of the
Core MIDI framework and just speak
in terms of functional methods.
So from just the MHC API point of view,
when you're dealing with devices,
[Transcript missing]
Through the API,
the devices that appear to
your application through the
API will come from two places,
either those data-driven profiles
or from the driver plug-ins,
which can automatically detect
the presence of hardware.
Through the API,
the devices that appear to
your application through the
API will come from two places,
either those data-driven profiles
or from the driver plug-ins,
which can automatically detect
the presence of hardware.
So this little bit of code here
is the one function call that
connects your application to MHC.
MHC client create.
You pass a unique identifier
for your application or client.
And that's used because there's
this concept of device-specific,
or rather application-specific
preferences.
My message callback is the
function that will get called when
messages arrive from the device.
And you supply a run loop on which
you'll receive those messages.
And at the end,
you get back this client object,
which you can pass to
other API functions.
[Transcript missing]
So you could use a loop,
something like this, to populate, say,
a scrolling list of the
devices that the user needs to
choose just one to work with.
So once having chosen a device
to work with in the application,
you can call MHC Client Connect Device.
And what that does is simply says, OK,
so everything that this
device sends to the computer,
I want my client via that callback
function to receive those messages.
[Transcript missing]
You get at the bottom of the
structure the value of the
control that was changed.
And you also get this MHC function
object which we'll look at in a
second and that specifies the actual
application function to be performed.
So the kinds of functions that
MHC defines for being controllable from
these control surfaces include transport,
stop, start, rewind, move to a marker,
and so on.
Mixer and effects control volume, pan,
mute, solo, balance,
So the kinds of functions that
MHC defines for being controllable from
these control surfaces include transport,
stop, start, rewind, move to a marker,
and so on.
Mixer and effects control volume, pan,
mute, solo, balance,
And there's also,
also kind of analogously to Apple Script,
you can define custom application
behavior that's controllable through
MHC by having a private function suite.
So inside the structure,
the first member is a suite,
which is a four-character code.
And again,
you can have a private suite there,
but we'll have defined some common ones
for those classes of functionality.
So there's the suite,
there's a function within that suite.
That function may need to
be qualified in some way.
For instance,
if the function is track volume,
then the group might say, okay,
we're dealing with the tracks here.
Or it could also say I'm
dealing with buses or outputs.
And then the specifier says, okay,
whether it's tracks or outputs,
which track or output are
we talking about here?
So that's how an
MHC function is specified.
Now, going back to the code example,
you've registered a client,
you've connected to a device,
and now you're going to start
receiving messages from the device.
Receiving input is pretty
much straightforward.
The only thing about it is that
it can be tedious because there
are a lot of different messages
you might want to respond to.
So you end up writing a
lot of switch statements.
So you get this message callback.
There are several other kinds of messages
other than the control having changed,
but the control having changed
is the most common one,
so we'll just follow that
through for the moment.
So we'll dispatch to another
function to do that because we
have more switch statements.
So here, after control has changed,
we'll say, OK,
so what suite is this function in?
OK, it's the transport suite.
Given that it's the transport suite,
which function is it?
To keep this from getting
completely full of code,
I'm just showing stop and play.
So you'll call your doStop
and doPlay functions.
And that's pretty much how your
input code will end up looking,
just lots of switch statements like
that to dispatch the individual messages
to your application's functions.
Just to continue here
are some more examples.
The channel strip,
and here's the track number as the
specifier as an example of how those
other fields in the message work.
And here we're handling the
mute and volume messages,
and we're passing along
the value of the muter,
the volume control as it was received.
Before we go further into the code
example and look at how we send
data back to the control surface,
it's useful now to look at what's
actually inside one of these
MHC devices and how it's represented.
Because to send feedback,
we're going to have to go through
and query the device a little more.
Before we go further into the code
example and look at how we send
data back to the control surface,
it's useful now to look at what's
actually inside one of these
MHC devices and how it's represented.
Because to send feedback,
we're going to have to go through
and query the device a little more.
There's this concept of a configuration
which comes into play when you have
devices that are kind of generic
MIDI controllers with presets.
I won't go further into that because
here I'm focusing on the devices with
large suites of dedicated functionality.
Generally,
these more complex devices will
just have one configuration.
So within the configuration,
there are groups which basically
just organize the actual controls,
which we call elements,
borrowing terminology
from the USB HID spec.
So given elements,
there are three types that
you need to be concerned with.
Some are input-only.
As you see there, a push button,
also the jog wheel at the bottom
right of the Mac key control.
Those are the simple ones to deal with.
They move, you get a message,
you respond to them.
Some devices, or some controls rather,
are input devices with feedback,
meaning that in some way they are
showing to you what you're doing,
whether it's a push button with a light
on it to indicate you're in play mode,
for instance.
Here in the slide we've got a rotary
encoder which shows some LEDs to indicate
the current position of the dial.
That same Mac key control also has
motorized faders on the volume controls.
So those controls are
the same as the dial.
They're not the same as the dial.
They're controls with feedback in them.
The application has responsibility
for sending feedback,
sometimes even while that knob
is actually being controlled.
So you'll get some information about the
element to determine how to handle that.
And lastly, there are elements that are
output or feedback only,
meaning that you'll never
receive a message from them,
but you might want to
send something to them.
In the example here,
we've got an LED display from the
Mac key control that's showing
the current position in the song.
So in terms of what you do in the
application to actually send feedback,
this is a brief overview
of the steps to do this.
You'll walk through the device's
elements in some way to go and find
the elements with feedback for the
functions that the application supports.
So in terms of what you do in the
application to actually send feedback,
this is a brief overview
of the steps to do this.
You'll walk through the device's
elements in some way to go and find
the elements with feedback for the
functions that the application supports.
place state.
To do that, we'll have had to have
located those elements which
provide that kind of feedback.
So looking at the code behind that,
when we first start the application,
we can make a call to MHC object,
apply function to children,
which essentially just traverses the
entire device hierarchy of elements.
And here we've defined
a callback function,
scan one element,
and that will get called for every
group and element inside the device.
So inside the function scan one element,
info not equals null is
MHC element info is a structure
that contains a bunch of
details about the element.
And if it's null,
then it's probably a group that
we're looking at and we don't care.
But if info is non-null
and we look inside the info
structure and it has feedback,
then we can say, "Okay,
let's look at this element.
Does this element correspond to a
function that we care about?" And here,
again,
in the interests of brevity and space,
I'm just showing one example.
So here we're looking to see, "Okay,
so is this the element in the
transport suite reflecting
the play state?" And if so,
then I'm going to cache a reference
to that element in gplay element.
And then later I'll be able to use that.
So in a more realistic example,
you would be doing switch statements
here again to keep track of
the elements that correspond
to your application's functions.
So inside your audio engine then,
so earlier we saw there's
functions to do start and do stop.
So the first thing you would do
in do start is whatever you have
to do to start actually playing,
load audio off disk or whatever,
start the hardware.
And then the last thing
you would do is call this,
I factored out doStart and doStop
so that they do all this engine work
and then they make a single call to
update MHC PlayState to reflect that
current PlayState to the MHC device.
So I've got a safety check
in that function to see if
gplay element actually exists.
And if we found one when we started up,
then I'll set the value
local variable to a Boolean,
true or false,
whether we're playing or not.
And then I can send that
value to the element that
corresponds to the play state.
So if that element that we found earlier,
for instance,
was a little green LED sitting
above the play button,
then at this point we would
be making that element,
that LED, turn green.
And that's feedback in a nutshell.
I just want to touch briefly on
some of the more advanced features.
There's touch and release which comes
into play when dealing with automation.
For those of you who've used
Logic or Digital Performer
or Pro Tools or whatever,
these applications when
playing back recorded volume,
pan and effects automation parameters,
it's great.
You can move the sliders on the
screen or if you've got a control
surface you can control your mix
from the hardware as it's going along
and the program will just record all
this and you'll get a little graph
of what you've done when you're done.
Then what will happen
often when you're mixing,
you'll say, "Okay,
I didn't quite get this part right.
I want to change the volume curve just
over this one little phrase here and
then let it keep going the way it was."
And the friendly way to do that is to put
a track into overwrite automation mode.
Now, these control surfaces devices
are pretty cool in that they
don't only send messages,
well, not all of them,
but the fancy ones,
not only will they send messages
when you move the slider,
but they will send a message
when you touch the slider.
So from the point of view of editing
existing automation data or saying,
okay, I just want to change part of it,
you can touch it when you want the
existing automation to stop playing,
at which point then you're
recording anything new that you do,
or you could just hold it to erase it.
And then when you release it,
you're done recording, and the previous
automation keeps playing.
So in any case,
MHC supports this by having this
concept of touch and release events.
You'll get a message.
Okay, the volume slider on track
one has been touched,
and you can respond
to that appropriately.
A lot of these devices
have multiple modes,
and this is the second advanced feature,
meaning that controls,
whether they're like arrow buttons or
the rotary encoders across the top,
do very different things depending
upon the context of the application
or a mode that's been selected
on the control surface itself.
To the extent possible,
we're going to try to hide that
inside the driver and profile,
but that's something that's...
Not fully baked like the rest of the API.
But that's just something to be aware of.
The other interesting thing
to think about with MHC,
not only can we send
simple volume commands,
for instance, to a motorized fader, say,
okay, slide up to the top or
to 0 dB or whatever,
but we also have these
SMPTE or Barbie unit displays.
And to do that, we've defined structures
where you can say,
okay, I'm going to send this
SMPTE time to this element.
And that's in there.
As controls are moved,
sometimes these devices will have
facilities for displaying the name
of the parameter that's currently
being affected and its current value.
And that's text labels.
On many of these devices,
we also have the ability
to graphically display.
In some way,
what's happening with the parameter,
whether it's the LED ring
around the rotary encoder or
even a bit mapped graphic,
for instance,
with a stereo spread parameter
on an effect that might be
illustrated as a graphic like that,
but you might only have to send one value
while specifying that feedback mode.
In any case,
these are all some of the more advanced.
advanced details that are in the API.
So just to review,
the basic idea here is that MHC takes
care of a lot of this complexity under
the hood of these control surfaces.
Whereas in the past, to support them,
you'd get deeply into
parsing MIDI messages.
Your whole internal representation
of how to support a control surface
is this large map of MIDI messages
going to and from the device.
And since there are so many
devices that do it so differently,
we'd like to pop up a level and let
you just deal with these devices
in a more functional manner.
So we have a preliminary
implementation in the seed,
and that's in the Core MIDI Framework,
the Header File Media Hardware Control.
And there's a fair amount
of commenting there.
And for those of you who are
working on applications and hardware
that can take advantage of this,
we'd really like to hear from you.
And we hope you'll keep
in touch and let us know.
what you need from us about this.
Thank you.
So that's Media Hardware Control.
I'd just like to add a few words
about the Core Audio file format.
[Transcript missing]
But it is chunky like AIFF and WAV,
so everything you know about
how to parse those files is
applicable in a general sense.
There's two basic approaches
you can use for supporting CAF.
You can either use our audio file API,
which makes CAF appear as just
another format like AIFF or WAV,
MP4, and so on.
Or you may have
cross-platform requirements,
in which case you might look at
an open-source audio library.
But for that matter,
you could write your own code.
The specification is
very detailed and clear.
And we're already seeing a number
of applications already using CAF.
iTunes can play CAF files.
Digital Performer, I believe,
can both read and write as can Amadeus.
But I'm just bringing this
up because it's out there,
we think it's a good format,
and wish more of you would
please incorporate support
for it in your applications.
Just one more.
This is, yeah,
two more things about this.
One thing we really like about
CAF is that it's really a fairly
complete generic container format,
meaning that pretty much any
kind of audio data you can think
of and describe with one of our
audio stream basic description
structures you can put in a CAF file,
whether it's PCM.
And within PCM,
whether it's big or little endian,
float or integer, 8, 24, 16, 32 bits.
It can hold compressed formats.
It has a structure similar to
an audio channel layout for
describing channel layouts.
It holds a magic cookie
for decoding formats.
This reflects the way that our
audio file and audio format or
converter APIs think of files and
what's in them as separate things.
Which is useful.
You can have files even if you
don't have the decoder to actually
listen to the audio in it.
The file is still intact.
[Transcript missing]
And as I said before,
the entire verbose clear CAP spec
is online at the developer,
Apple, the Apple developer audio site.
And you can see it there.
And that's the CAP file.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Doug.
So the rest of the talk we're
going to go through the AudioQ API.
This is a new API in Leopard.
It's a high-level API service
to play buffers of audio,
record buffers of audio in linear PCM,
playback you can play any content,
the header files in the
audio toolbox framework.
And by high-level service,
we really have become very aware of
some of the complexities developers
have to deal with to do what
should be fairly simple tasks.
And so the idea of this API is to
provide a much simpler interface where
a lot of the work that Core Audio will
do to get the data out of the system
or get the data into your application
is taken care of underneath the system.
So we're going to go through the
core audio framework and we're
going to go through the core audio
framework and we're going to go
through the core audio framework.
You'll notice similarities to,
in some respects anyway,
to the Sound Manager API with
the AudioQ API.
However,
the Sound Manager is deprecated in
Leopard and this is a formal deprecation.
I think informally we've been
deprecating it for some years now.
But Sound Manager will also
not be available in 64-bit.
All of the Core Audio frameworks are
available to 64-bit applications.
So if you're going forward
with your application,
now is a very good time, I think,
to move off Sound Manager if you've still
got code there and this API should be
very appropriate for that kind of use.
So when we go through this,
there's several roles we want
to describe in the queue.
There's the creation of the queue itself.
It's how the queue manages its buffers,
how it manages state like start and stop,
priming, pausing, resuming,
what reset is and how it works.
You can send parameters to the queue
so that you can change playback
characteristics of the queue.
And the queue also provides
some timing services.
And we'll just have a brief
overview of what that is.
One of the things,
as we've already mentioned,
is the queue handles
both input and output.
And the way that we've decided to
do this is to share as much of the
code and the API between both roles.
And so when you have an
API that's specific for output,
as you'll see in a moment,
to create an audio queue
object to do output,
that API will be audio queue, new output,
whatever it's called.
And same for input,
but a lot of the cases you'll actually
see that it's an audio queue API and you
can use it for either input or output.
The QObjects themselves are not
doing input and output together.
They're either an input
or an output object.
So when describing what the
queue does and how it works,
I thought the best way to approach
this would be to look through
an example of what it would take
to play a file with the queue.
The code itself uses two primary,
two APIs in the audio toolbox,
the audio file API that Doug just sort
of mentioned in the context of CAF files,
and the audio queue API,
and the audio queue API is obviously
the thing that interests us.
Because we're dealing
with the audio file API,
the code is also going to be very general
and it's going to deal with any kind of
format that Core Audio can understand,
whether it's compressed,
variable bitrate audio, or linear PCM.
So the code itself that we'll
be looking through will deal
with those circumstances.
So when we play a file,
the basic jobs we have to do,
is to open the file and we need
to read some data about the file.
And then we use that information to
create the audio cue and to configure it.
Then we'll need to allocate
buffers to read the data into.
And then those are the buffers
that we'll cue up to the cue.
Then we'll start the cue object to play.
And then that'll decode existing buffers.
And then the cue's runtime state
is managed in its communications
to the client with a callback.
And so the cue will call a callback
and you'll see what we'll do
to deal with that callback and
keep the program doing its work.
And then at the end of the
file we dispose and clean up.
So they're the main steps that we're
going to have a look through now.
There's no real demo here.
The demo is beep.
Play the file.
So AQ test and the next
step is to create the demo.
And then we'll have to
do a demo of the demo.
the name of the file
that you want to play.
The first thing we have to do to play
the file is to find out is to open the
file and so the next line is to make
an FSRef from the file path and then
audio file open will open that file.
If that succeeds of course then
we have got a valid audio file.
You will notice the last argument
there to the audio file open
call is myinfo.m audio file.
The myinfo is a structure that we are
going to define in our program which
I have just given it a type of AQ test
info and that contains basically the
information that we need to configure or
keep around in order to run this program.
So it is the file ID,
the description of the
format that is in the file,
the data format.
It is contained within the file,
the queue itself, the buffers that we are
going to use with the queue,
where we are reading from in the file,
how many packets of the file we
can read at a particular time
and packet descriptions which
we will go into in a minute.
Then the other thing aside from just the
procedural code of calling the APIs that
we will need to define is the callback
and we will have a look at that as well.
So our next step is to get
the format from the file,
the data format that's
contained within the file.
And then once we have that,
we have enough information
to create an output queue.
Because when you create an output queue,
the one thing you should define
is the format that the queue
is going to be dealing with,
the format of the data it's
going to be dealing with.
So we read that data format,
create the queue.
You'll notice that I'm specifying
see if run loop get current and
see if run loop common modes.
And if I passed in null for those,
that would be the value
of those two arguments.
And what they define,
as you saw with MHC as well,
is that they define the thread
and the mode that the queue
object can call your callback on.
And that gives you some control about
the priority of the thread that you're
going to use to fill the buffers.
And you can have that behavioral
control in your program.
And then we get back a
queue object from this call.
So with buffer management,
we allocate buffers,
but we ask the queue to
allocate the buffers for us,
and the queue will own the buffers.
But before we can allocate the buffers,
we need to know some
things about the format.
Basically, how big we want,
which at the moment in the program,
we'll just keep a constant size.
But we also want to really know
if we're dealing with variable
bitrate or constant bitrate audio.
And just as a review,
I thought we'll go through what
the characteristics of these
two audio kind of types mean.
So CVR audio, constant bitrate audio,
is linear PCM,
which is uncompressed audio.
There's also a collection of CVR codecs.
IMA4 is one, QDesign is another.
And they generate packets of audio
that have both the same size of bytes,
number of bytes,
and the number of sample frames
in each packet is also the same.
Linear PCM, there's one frame per packet.
So in stereo linear PCM, you'd have left,
right, left, right.
And the left and right together
is what we call a packet.
And compressed audio,
it will be a block of audio.
So you can see the
diagram there that CVR,
every packet is the same size.
In the audio stream basic description,
bytes and frames per packet are
both specified with non-zero values.
Now in our program,
we've just got an idea of 64K
value for G buffer size bytes.
And then we can use the bytes per
packet field to tell us how many
packets we can read at a given time.
And so that's what we need
to understand in our program.
And this is, of course,
based on the data format
contained within the file.
And because it's CBR,
we can calculate from any
place where the packets are.
So we don't need packet descriptions.
We don't need any external information
to tell us the packet 20 is here.
Now, that's not true in VBR.
So in VBR,
we have to do a little bit more work.
So with VBR, let's try and understand,
well, what is VBR?
Each packet of audio is a
different size in bytes.
That's a common case.
You can get VBR where you'll
have also the frames contained
in each packet differing.
But the more common case is that the
size of each packet is different.
An example is MPEG-4's AAC, MPEG-1 or 2,
Layer 3.
They're both VBR formats.
Apple Lossless, FLAC.
These are all VBR formats.
And in an audio stream basic description,
a VBR format,
you can tell because the bytes per
packet will have a value of zero.
In other words, we don't know.
Each packet's different.
And so now to locate a packet
in just a big blob of data,
we need to know a couple
of bits of information.
We need to know where in that
blob of data a packet is,
and we need to know the size
of that particular packet.
So the audio stream packet description,
which is a structure in CordioTypes,
it defines both where each packet
begins and how big each packet is.
And the diagram there is fairly clear in
that each packet can be a different size.
In our program, we use the complete test,
which is bytes or frames
per packet is zero.
In other words,
the file can't give you a constant
value for either of those two fields.
Now we have VBR data.
Then we go and we ask the file,
what is the largest size of the packets
of data that you have in your file?
What is the largest size
of one of those packets?
If I go back to the preceding slide,
you'll see the,
I'm going to use the laser pointer
because everyone tells me not to.
You see this guy here
is the largest packet.
But I don't want to have to start
right from the beginning and go
all the way through because in
some formats that might mean,
some file formats,
that might mean I'll have
to read the whole file.
So the call that we're
using here is an estimation.
And the file can usually,
if it doesn't know specifically,
without having to pass the whole file,
it can make an estimation.
And this will be a
conservative estimation.
And that will give you back
the maximum packet size that
could be contained in that file.
And so this is a cheap call.
There's another call where
you can get the actual value,
but for some formats
like MP3 as an example,
with a large MP3 file,
that can take you a long time because
you have to read the whole file.
[Transcript missing]